Prose

Old English Orosius (Trans. M. Godden)

The Elbing flow into Estmere from the east, from the lake on which Truso stands, and they emerge into Estmere together, the Elbing in the east and the Vistula from the land of the Wends in the south, and then the Elbing takes the Vistula’s names , and flows from the lake northwest to the sea. That’s why it is called the Vistula estuary. Estland is very large with a great many towns, and there is a king in every town. There is plenty of honey and fishing. The king and the most important people drink mare’s milk, and the less well-off and the slaves drink mead. There is a lot of fighting among them. Ale is not brewed among the Ests  but there is plenty of mead.
	There is a custom among the Ests that when anyone dies, the body  lies in his house uncremated (unforbærned), with his family and friends, for a month or two. The kings and the other leading people sometimes lie uncremated (unforbærned) for half a year and remain above ground in their houses, the more wealth they have the longer they lie there. All the time that the body (lic) is in the house, there has to be drink and sport, until the body is burned (forbærnað). On the day that they plan to carry the body to the pyre (ade) they divide his property, whatever is left after the drinking and games, into five or six portions, sometimes more depending on the extent of property. Then they place the largest portion somewhere a mile from the estate, then the second portion, then the third, until it is all laid out in the space of that one mile, with the smallest part nearest to the estate where the dead person lies. 
	Then all the men who have the fastest horses in that country are gathered together, somewhere five or six miles from the property. Then they all gallop toward the property; the one with the fastest horse gets to the first and biggest portion, and so on after that, until it is all taken, and the one who gets to the smallest portion nearest the estate takes that. Each rider then goes his way with the property, and they are allowed to keep it all. So fast horses are very valuable there. When the dead man’s property is all disposed of in this way, they carry him out and cremate (forbærneð) him with his weapons and clothes. They dispose of almost all his property through the long lying-in at the dead person’s house and by what they lay out along the road, which strangers ride to and take.
	It is the practice among the Ests that everyone, whatever their country, must be cremated (forbærned). If a single bone is found unburned (unforbærned), a heavy penalty is exacted. Among the Ests there is a community that can make things cold. The dead bodies lie uncremated for so long without rotting because these people create a chill in them.  If you put out two vessels full of ale or water, they make one of them freeze solid, whether it is summer or winter.



[1) These are generally identified as Western Balts – Prussians. 2)This not in the OE, which literally says ‘he lies inside unburned/uncremated with his kin and friends…’ (he lið inne unforbærned mid his magum and freondum...) 3) OE literally runs: ‘And there is among the Ests a kin-group that can make things cold, and by them those dead men may lie for so long and not rot, because they work that cold in them.’]
